Well, we're going to dive in to this
study of Lectio Divina on prayer, and
we're gonna look at five easy steps to
prayer. And we're gonna see that prayer
is an invitation from God, that prayer
is an invitation into a divine dialogue
with God and into an encounter with
God. Pope Benedict XVI in his first
encyclical, he mentions that
Christianity is not simply a creed, but
rather an encounter with the living
God. And that encounter happens
especially in prayer. Indeed, the
Catechism of the Catholic Church talks
about prayer as that encounter with
God, that we're invited to an encounter
with God, we're invited to intimacy
with God. The challenge is most of us
don't feel like we encounter God very
often, or very deeply. Most of us long
for intimacy with God, but we haven't
found it yet. And there's this ancient
method in the Catholic tradition of
prayer, called lectio divina, and we're
going to talk about that method, which
sounds very sophisticated, and with an
ancient Latin title, but it's simply
Latin because that was the language of
the early church of the Roman Empire.
But that Latin title shouldn't throw us
off to this being a very difficult or
sophisticated form of prayer. It's
actually quite simple. It means the
divine reading, that is praying with
Scripture. And we're going to learn
what the tradition has to offer us in
the wisdom of the church on how to pray
with Scripture. And we'll see that
there's certain steps. And I think what
we'll find is that the challenges that
we oftentimes have in prayer is because
we don't know how to pray as we ought,
as the disciples question, Jesus, Lord,
teach us to pray. In Luke 11, Lord,
teach us to pray. And St. Paul says, in
Romans 8, we don't know how to pray as
we ought. It's something that God has
to lead us and teach us in. And God
will teach each individual but the Lord
has taught the church in the wisdom and
tradition of the church, how to pray,
and our church is like a good mother.
And she wants to pass on this
tradition, this wisdom that the saints
have learned in their prayer time. And
in their perseverance in prayer, the
saints have learned simple methods for
praying well, and that tradition that's
been forged by monks and sisters in
convents, and monasteries, by saints,
and that method, those lessons are at
our fingertips if we just study this
tradition, and look into what the
church wants to give us in this great
tradition of prayer. So that's what I
want to dive into. But first, I want to
start with just the problem of prayer.
We all know as Christians that we ought
to pray, we know that it's one of those
fundamental Christian duties, I ought
to pray. However, we oftentimes see
this duty of prayer as an obligation
that is not engaging or enticing or
inspiring. We see it as, I know I ought
to floss.
I know it's good for my health. But I
don't want to do it, and I don't enjoy
doing it. And I'm very relieved when I
can check off the box. Yep, I flossed.
Got that done. And few of us enjoy
flossing. I think probably very few of
us, indeed.
And oftentimes, Christians encounter
prayer like flossing, something they
know they ought to do, something that
they want to check off. It's good for
me to do. I'm glad I did it. But we're
relieved when it's done. And we're
free.
And that's a shame because prayer
should be something that we deeply
desire to do that we find great
satisfaction, in that encounter of
prayer in that time of prayer. Prayer
should be something that feeds our
soul, and our spirit, and strengthens
us for life. We should walk away from
prayer empowered and encouraged, and
oftentimes inspired. And that's what
God wants.
He wants us to leave that encounter,
like Moses left his encounter with God,
with his face, aglow, and his heart,
aflame. That's what God wants for us in
prayer. And if we learn to pray, like
we should, if we learn the wisdom of
prayer,
we can have that encounter. We can have
prayer as something we long for and
desire. Prayer should be what that
beautiful bride in a Song of Song says
in chapter 3:1, I sought him who my
soul loves.
And then throughout the next few verses
of the Song of Songs in chapter 3:1-4,
she repeats this refrain, I sought him
whom my soul loves.
Prayer is that seeking of God.
It's that search for God. But the
problem going back to this challenge
that we face is, how do we pray? And
oftentimes, I think we have some false
ideas about prayer, or we take the
steps of prayer out of order, and it
makes prayer much more difficult than
it ought to be. And that's what I want
to go through in this. This first
session is these challenges of prayer.
The first thing about prayer that I
think is that, if we're honest, and I
know at least this is the great
temptation for me.
As I look back, you know, when I really
wanted to start to pray, when I was 16,
I really encountered Christ at a
retreat. And I wanted to start to pray.
And I had some great moments of prayer.
But then after that retreat experience,
and I went back to my everyday life, I
could pray at the retreat. But I
couldn't pray in my everyday life. I
didn't know how to pray. I didn't know
where to begin.
And I had a search and try to struggle.
And so my spiritual life was on-again
off-again, when I would have youth
group once a week, and we would sing
praise and worship songs, and we'd
gather together, we would share
petitionary prayers. I could pray there
with everybody. But then left to my own
devices, the next day, I didn't know
what to do.
There wasn't, you know, the praise and
worship music, there wasn't the
fellowship of sharing intentions and
encouragement. I didn't know how to
pray. And so I'd fall off of prayer.
And that inconsistency in my prayer
life as a teenager, was then reflected
in the inconsistency in my spiritual
life and in my moral life. And I would
have these great moments when I was on
retreat, or with my friends, who were
who were devout and wanted to follow
Christ, but then left alone. I didn't
know what to do. That becomes the
challenge. And I think the greatest
temptation to prayer, the greatest
threat to prayer is that we feel that
prayer, oftentimes, is dry and arid.
And it's hard to be earnest about
prayer, if it's arid and dry.
It's hard to get excited, enthusiastic,
yeah, I want to spend that time,
because you could go to the experience
of going to a chapel, or praying in
your room. And I'd close my eyes and I
want to hear God speak to me. And I
wouldn't hear a voice. I wasn't a
mystic. I wasn't a saint. I wouldn't
hear a voice speak to me, it would be
silence. And I would share a few things
on my heart. Usually petitionary
prayer, very basic. God help me get
through this, help me with that, help
me with this test. Right.
But it was, after I was done with my
petitions, I was pretty much spent in
my prayer. I had nothing left to say,
typically. And I had nothing to hear.
And so what happened in my temptation
with prayer is my prayer became a
monologue. I would talk and God would
say nothing.
And the the challenge or the problem
with that I realized later on in life,
as a young father of my son, Joseph,
when he was about four or five, he's a
young boy. And we were tucking him into
bed one night. And as I was tucking him
in, we had had a wonderful dinner, we
had storytime, we had read bedtime
stories. And I was put tucking him in
with that little glass of water. That's
about you know, 10% full of water.
Because as a wise parent, you know, not
to give them too much water at night,
before bedtime. And everything was done
according to script. And as I was, you
know, saying good night, he's his
little lip started quiver. And he
started to cry. I said what I could
what could possibly be wrong? I've been
with him for the last several hours of
the day.
What could possibly wrong like, Joseph,
what's wrong? And he says, to my shock,
absolutely did not expect what he what
he said next, he said, God doesn't love
me.
God doesn't love me. Now, that hit me,
like a ton of bricks. I mean, that was
that pierced my heart. My day job is to
teach people about God. Right? As a
scripture scholar and theologian, I
teach people about God and God is love.
And for him to think that God does not
love him, he doesn't have any idea who
God is.
So of course, I did what any good
father would do. I launched into a
treatise of God's love and explain, Of
course, you're wrong. God loves you. He
loves you very much. Just like, I love
you know, now go to bed.
Now, after talking with my wife, I told
her what he said. And I said, I can't
believe you know, he would say
something like this. This is this is
supposed to be teenage years, not age
four and five. This is goes against all
the parenting manuals, crisis of faith
at age four or five. Not fair. Right?
Not fair. But my wife had an idea that
I didn't have and this really comes out
of the feminine genius. She went in and
actually asked my son Joseph, why he
thought God didn't love him. That
question never occurred to me. I just
saw problem-solution. He thinks God
doesn't love him,
I will tell him and teach him why God
loves him, and how much God loves him.
So she goes in with the feminine genius
says, Why do you think God doesn't love
you? And then he explained. Well, you
know, we heard that story of God
speaking to St. Francis of Assisi from
the San Damiano cross. And God spoke to
Francis. And then there's a story about
Jonah. And God spoke to Jonah.
And what Joseph realized is, God had
never spoken to him. And so he looked
at that little crucifix above his bed.
And he would close his eyes at night
and want Jesus to speak to him.
And God never did.
And so what a child in his innocence
realizes is that if someone doesn't
speak to you,
they certainly couldn't love you.
Now, as adults, we get more
sophisticated, we get more complex, and
we oftentimes lack the courage to face
the truth about reality face on. The
beauty of a child is a child is
ruthless in their honesty,
in the way they look at reality.
They're not,
you know, they haven't been corrupted,
yet. They look at reality full on. And
for that child, he realized, if God
doesn't speak to me, God must not love
me.
God must not love me. Now, the
assumption is profound. If God does
love me, he must speak to me.
And that's the beautiful tradition of
Christianity. God does speak to us. God
does love us so much that He doesn't
just speak words to us. He speaks the
word, Jesus, who becomes flesh. The
Word became flesh and dwelt among us.
God loves us so much that He speaks a
word that he hands over this Word to
us, in his son, and that word will
suffer and bleed and sweat and die for
us. That's how much God wants to
communicate to us.
But the problem was, we're oftentimes
deaf to God's Word.
And so in a sense, God has to shout
from the cross, that he does love us,
that he does love us. Now what we had
to teach our son is that God does speak
to us and God spoke in that powerful
way to St. Francis of Assisi from the
cross. But that was unusual even for
St. Francis, God normally spoke to
Francis from his Word, the Scriptures.
Francis' rule, Francis' spirituality
was fed from his daily encounter with
the Word. As Francis worked in the San
Damiano church, rebuilding that church,
his focus of his prayer life was
hearing the Word of God each day in the
Mass and reflecting on that Word as a
word spoken to him.
And so the idea that Francis would sell
what he possesses, the idea that
Francis would live with simplicity that
comes from his hearing the Sermon on
the Mount.
So Jesus' normative way to speak to St.
Francis of Assisi was in His Word, and
the Sermon on the Mount, where he
teaches the 12 apostles as he sends
them out that they should go out in
twos, and they should take not an extra
tunic. And Francis hears that word
himself and he looks around, he's got
three followers and says, okay, Jesus
sends us out in twos you two go out
this way to that village, and me and
the other one will go out to this
village.
In other words, Jesus spoke to Francis
primarily through His Word through the
Scriptures. And this is the great
insight in the early Christian
tradition, such that St. Ambrose, that
great teacher of St. Augustine. St.
Ambrose said when you pick up the
scriptures, God speaks to you. When you
share what's on your heart and your
mind, you speak to God. The St. Cyprian
is another example. St. Cyprian says
earnestly practice lectio divina, which
is the taking up of Scripture. Because
when you pray, you speak to God, and
when you hear Him in His Word, he
speaks to you.
So God is speaking to us, in His Word
in the Scriptures, that becomes the
key. We don't have to have a mystic
gene. We don't have to be a prophet
like Jonah.
Or a saint like St. Francis. That's the
unusual way but even in their lives,
God primarily speaks to the prophets
and to the saints through His Word, as
we're going to see. And so the
scriptures become the way God speaks to
us. So we have to take and read, take
and read the scriptures. That's going
to be one of the rallying cries of St.
Augustine. We'll see it in
St. Augustine's conversion. In book 8
of his Confessions, he talks about that
turning point in his life. And he was
at a friend's little villa. And he was
in the courtyard, in the back
courtyard, which is like a garden. And
in that garden, he's distressed because
he heard the story of St. Anthony of
the Desert and how he followed Jesus
and St. Anthony as his parents die and
he gets this great inheritance this
incredible fortune of wealth. He
wonders, what should I do with it? So
he goes to the church. And as he enters
the church, the reading for mass is the
story of the rich young man. And Jesus
says to the rich young man, go, sell
all that you have, and come and follow
me. And Anthony hears that not as a
word of Jesus spoken to the rich young
man in the first century, but as the
Word of God that's living and active,
spoken to him at that moment. And
Anthony follows that advice.
And that will change his life.
And it will change his world. As he
begins this movement of monasticism.
This going out into the living in the
desert, totally dedicated to God. And
Augustine hears these stories and a
couple others, and he's moved by them
he's like, Why can't I make that jump
that plunge, and he's been struggling,
so it goes out in that little garden,
and he begins to almost break down, he
starts to weep, because he's torn. He's
torn, because he knows his life living
in the world is unhappy and miserable,
but he's afraid of the cost of
discipleship. He's afraid that
following God will cost him dearly.
And he's not sure if that is the right
way or not, and he's not sure what to
do. And as he goes on to that garden,
he starts weeping. In the quiet of that
night, he hears a child's voice over
the walls outside, and this child is
singing his song, and the song is tolle
lege, tolle lege, tolle lege, which in
Latin means, take and read, take and
read. So what does he do? He takes the
Bible. And he opens up to Romans 13.
And in the midst of Romans 13, verse 11
and following he hears St. Paul say to
the Romans, the night is far spent, put
away the deeds of the flesh. May no
longer make provisions for the flesh.
And remember what Augustine had just
said earlier, right before this point,
he recounted his earlier prayer, God
give me chastity, but not yet.
Right, he was making all kinds of
provisions for the flesh, which is why
it was hard to make this jump into
really following Christ.
And so he hears the word of God say, no
longer make any provisions for the
flesh,
and put off the deeds of darkness, and
put on the deeds of Christ, the light
of Christ, and walk in the light.
And he hears that as a word spoken by
God to him.
And it changes his life. He acts on
that word.
So, we, like Augustine are invited to
hear God's word. But the challenge for
us as we pick up the scriptures, is
that we are tempted to think that this
is a word spoken to other people in
another time and age. And we know
historically, they are words spoken to
different people at different times.
It's a word of God spoken to Abraham,
or to Moses, or to David, or to Peter,
or to Mary.
But the secret of the saints is that
they hear the word of God afresh and
living, and in the present. They hear
it as God's speaking now to them.
And so the temptation that we have to
overcome is to pick up the scriptures
and hear it as a word spoken to
somebody else, such that we just become
eavesdroppers so to speak. We're just
listening in on somebody else's
conversation. We're watching another
dialogue. But we don't enter the
dialogue.
We study it, but we don't encounter it.
We can study God's Word in the
Scriptures, as many scholars have, but
never encounter that Word.
And it was the great philosopher of the
20th century, the great philosopher of
language, Ludwig Wittgenstein who at
the end of one of his great treatises,
said, You can't hear a God if someone
else is being addressed.
You can't hear God if someone else is
being addressed.
In other words, Anthony wouldn't have
heard God speak to him if he would have
said hmm, that's interesting and
curious how God spoke to that rich
young man in the first century.
That Jewish guy; that's kind of
curious. And Augustine
could have said, Well, that was Paul's
address to the Christians in Rome in
the mid 50s. AD. I wonder what they
were doing back then? That's curious.
Right, no. What Anthony and Augustine,
and what every saint does, is they
listen to God's Word, and they have an
ability to hear it.
Because they hear it as a word spoken
to them. That's the secret of the
saints. And that's what Christ wants,
and his encounter with us in His Word.
And so we're gonna see then, that
there's simply two simple ingredients
prayer,
two things necessary
for prayer, to start us off, and that
is, we come and we listen first to God
speak to us in his scriptures. We take
and read,
as Augustine would say, stealing from
his mentor, St. Ambrose, when you pray,
you share what's on your heart and mind
with God, you speak to God. And when
you open the scriptures, God speaks
back to you.
And it takes two
to tango, it takes two to have a
dialogue. And if we make prayer a
dynamic dialogue, it becomes
interesting and engaging.
If we reduce prayer, on the other hand
to a monologue, it becomes tedious and
tiresome and boring. So for example, if
you know somebody who likes to talk a
lot, and they take up time of
possession, I have a friend who, whose
wife gave him as a teasing joke, a
t-shirt that said, help me I can't shut
up.
Right? That was a bit of a clue.
Sometimes men are a little clueless. We
don't put two and two together. But
that idea is, you know, sometimes if
someone calls you and you see the
caller id, and your like oh, my gosh,
if I answer that, it'll take me 30
minutes to get off if I start from the
first minute to try to get off. So
we're afraid to take the call, right?
Well, that's how prayer oftentimes is.
The reason that that person is so
tedious to talk to, is because it's a
monologue. It's a one way street, you
can't get a word in edgewise. They just
talk and talk and talk. What makes
conversation interesting and engaging
is when it's a dynamic dialogue. Right?
When there's an interchange, someone
shares something, share something back
and you're laughing, you're going back
and forth. And it's interesting, it's
engaging, it's dynamic, because it's a
dialogue.
Right?
Well, I believe that prayer
has a challenge for us, and that we see
prayer as a monologue. And therefore we
see it as monotonous and tiresome and
boring and dull. And so any excuse to
not pray is welcome.
Instead, however, if we encounter
prayer, as a dialogue,
we would find that it's far more
engaging than we ever imagined. It's
far more interesting. What is prayer?
Prayer is a dialogue with God.
It's a conversation with God, it's an
encounter with God. But it's an
encounter with the other.
With us, it's a relationship. It's the
I-Thou, it's this dialogue. And if we
reduce prayer to ourselves alone,
in solitude, we lose the beauty of
prayer. We lose the relational idea of
prayer. Now, the Catechism of the
Catholic Church talks about prayer as
an encounter as a dialogue. And it sets
up at the very beginning of its
teaching on prayer, the beautiful scene
of the Samaritan woman at the well, in
John chapter 4, where Jesus comes to
the well, and Jesus thirsts. And I want
to talk about that scene. I want to
read what the Catechism has to say
about that. And as I do that, I want
you to look at this beautiful icon here
of Jesus with the Samaritan woman. This
was this icon was painted by the priest
who has said mass for over 40 years in
the Holy Land at Jacob's Well. Father
Justinian built the church there.
And he built that church over it, and
he did this icon. He's a great famous
iconographer. Fr. Justinian's from
Greece. And he grew up trained in the
iconic tradition. And so he shows Jesus
sitting at the well and the Samaritan
woman, and he had the Samaritan woman
with the jug, because Jesus has nothing
to draw water from from the well. And
Jesus comes to well because he thirsts,
and the Catechism says that prayer,
ironically and paradoxically, is first
God's thirst for you.
God searches and longs for us
to seek Him and to encounter him. We
think that it's, prayer is man's search
for God. And the Catechism says, we get
it backwards. God's the initiator,
God's the starting point. And so I want
to give us a couple little quotes from
this, this paragraph to end with, to
show us that prayer is that encounter
that becomes a dialogue. So in
paragraph 2560, of the Catechism says,
The wonder of prayer is revealed beside
the well,
where we come seeking water.
There Christ comes to meet every human
being.
It is he who first seeks us and asks us
for a drink. Jesus thirsts. His asking
arises from the depths of God's desire
for us.
That's an extraordinary statement.
God thirsts. It was one of the greatest
saints of the 20th century Mother
Teresa of Calcutta, who put that
phrase, I thirst that Jesus speaks on
the cross. And she put it next to every
crucifix in every one of the
Missionaries of Charity chapels. So
that every sister and every person
would come in, every volunteer, every
poor person, every sick person, in one
of those places would come and the
first thing that they would hear is a
word from Christ, I thirst.
And what Jesus revealed to Mother is
that he thirsts for us, he thirsts for
our love.
God seeks us out. This is the
extraordinary good news. God's not just
simply a passive DVD saying, prayer
would be good for you like flossing,
and it's something you ought to do.
And so do it. Now. God is love. And to
love is to thirst for love. If you love
you long for the beloved, and because
God in His very being is love, God and
His very being hungers and thirsts and
desires your heart and your love.
That's the first lesson of prayer that
our Holy Mother Church teaches us in
the Catechism. And we are invited to
come to that well, and encounter God's
thirst. Now how we do that is what
we're going to take up in the next
several episodes.